Good morning.
My name is Dan Nebrig.
I'm the executive assistant to our center director and on his behalf I would like to welcome
you to this, the third in a series of 20th anniversary of Apollo lectures and discussions
that we've been having.
The first two dealt with what we knew about the moon before Apollo and then yesterday
with the technical planning for the Apollo missions.
Today's sessions cover an aspect of our work here that is unique to the Johnson Space Center,
that of mission control and more importantly about the planning for the operation of those
missions that are so essential to the success of the missions.
Each of our panelists today is you'd eminently qualified to discuss the topics because they
have all served as flight directors or mission controllers during the Apollo program.
Now of course later in their life they went on to other ancillary positions like
center director and program manager and a few unimportant jobs like that but I'm sure they
would all consider their time and mission control to be among the highlights of their career.
Our moderator today is also eminently qualified for this subject.
Dr. Joe Allen received his PhD from Yale University and in 1967 was selected as an astronaut.
Joe was the on the support crew for Apollo 15 where he served as the mission scientist.
He was Capcom for STS-1 and then flew as a mission specialist on STS-5 and 51A.
So he has qualifications from both the ground and flight to serve on this panel.
I'm sure you've all seen pictures of Joe tooling around in space in his John to EMU
rescuing distress satellites as we did on 51A. He is currently the president of space industries
and incorporated in here in Houston so please welcome Dr. Joe Allen.
Dan thank you very much and welcome everyone.
I'm pleased to be the moderator today.
Every group of flight directors needs moderation and I've been
given that assignment and I welcome it. I appreciate it very much. As Dan said,
I was at NASA here at the Johnson Space Center for a number of years and I think my main qualification
to serve as a referee today is the fact that I was also privileged to work in the mission control
for a number of years. It's a very interesting demanding and more often than not an enjoyable
assignment. I worked for these gentlemen on the panel who were chief flight directors during
the Apollo years and their assignment for today over the next couple of hours or so is to recollect
and I quote the instructions given to us, recollect important aspects of the missions themselves.
They're eminently qualified to do that and if they don't remember the important things,
I guarantee they'll remember some of the intriguing things and I hope some of the amusing things
that occurred from the perspective of the flight directors during the Apollo missions.
We're gathered really to observe these missions and to celebrate the remarkable success of them.
The main intent of today's panel is to celebrate and to enjoy and to that end,
if you are curious about one or two things they don't quite explain, please hold up your hand
and starting very early, I think we'll begin with questions from the audience and I know if you
don't have questions, there are numbers of things I've wondered about that I will begin to ask about.
My panel members are starting here, Dr. Glenn Loney.
Glenn is from Pennsylvania, from Old Forge, Pennsylvania. He comes to the space business
by way of the University of Scranton and Detroit. Glenn began not with NASA but with NAACA,
the predecessor of NASA in, believe it or not, 1958. He was with the Space Task Group
from 1959 to 1962. He came here as one of the original founders of the Man's Spacecraft Center in 1962.
He was the chief of the flight directors during many of the Apollo missions
and through the Apollo years, I went on to serve in many other capacities at NASA and he is now
the head of the Rockwell International Operations here in Houston, Texas.
On Glenn's right is Cliff Charles' worth. From I'm told originally Minnesota, I don't quite believe it,
but only briefly probably spent really much time in Mississippi, came to the Man's Spacecraft Center
also in 1962. Prior to that, he had been with the Army at KSC and it was, it was
Canaveral then or what? I don't remember back that part. Cliff was a flight director here
of 1962 through 1970 and also since that time had many other duties including the Assignment of
Deputy Director of the then Johnson Space Center and he retired from JSC last year.
Next to Cliff, Jerry Griffin. I know it's Jerry, yeah. From Athens, Texas.
Jerry went from Athens and spent an enormous amount of time at Texas A&M.
I think he's still receiving remedial instruction from there.
It was a flight director beginning with Germany 11 having come to JSC in 64
and then worked most of the Apollo missions if not. Well, I think probably all he was the lead
flight director on 12, 15 and 17. He went on to many other assignments since that time including
the director of the Johnson Space Center and he's currently with a headhunting firm here in Houston,
Texas. Not yet successful, he's not found a gainful employment for me as yet.
Finally, final panelist Steve Bales. Believe me, Steve is the youngest of the group. He was 20 years
younger when Apollo landed. We all, but Steve was in his early 20s at that time. He's originally from
Iowa. He went to school in Iowa. Came here immediately there after I guess in 64. It was a flight
controller during Apollo known as Guido. So I did it was years before I knew his name actually was
Bales. He's now the assistant director program support in the missions operations directorate.
And with that, I'll turn back to Glenn who was the lead flight director on Apollo 7 that really
got the Apollo mission started. Glenn. Thank you, Joe.
I've been asked to start with Apollo 7 because it was the first man flight that we flew with the
Apollo spacecraft. But perhaps more general than that, I would talk about it in terms of the events
that led up to Apollo 7. I think in the minds of everybody here up through and including Apollo 7,
we were Earth orbit people. We were figuring out how to fly spacecraft. And I think starting
after Apollo 7 with the very dramatic Apollo 8 that Cliff will tell us about, we began the assault
on the moon. Leading up to Apollo 7, we had a number of things happen in the program that were
planned that don't get much attention and haven't been talked about much in these events. They were
a series of unmanned shots that we had. We started off with a set of boilerplate vehicles out in
white sands out in the desert where we shot up solid rockets to about 30,000 feet and then we
blew them up and separated the command module and tested the escape system. We probably had half a
dozen shots out there in the desert. Some worked and some by the way were spooky as the devil
because some of them wanted to come back over the team that was launching them because of the winds.
So I was kind of an exciting time and we learned something about the Apollo escape system and how
it was going to work and how indeed we could trust it. We never actually had to use it in a man
flight but the Apollo escape system was very reliable and proven by those tests. We had a series
of unmanned flights called 201 and 202 which were on the Saturn 1B which was the smaller Saturn
rocket used for Earth orbital flights and used on Apollo 7. Those flights were designed to test
the heat shield. There was a lot we didn't know about the aerodynamics and the heating that would
go with a return for the moon and we exercised those parameters on a couple of flights that we
called 201 and 202 in the mid-60s and we had a lot of fun with those because they were unmanned and
we had a lot of things to do from the control center. Later on we flew the Saturn twice unmanned.
Apollo 501 and 502. They also were very exciting flights and the first one went by the book that
was the one I had. The next one that Cliff had almost came unglued a couple of times and it was
kind of a scary flight and I'm sure you'll hear more about that during the course of the day.
Before I then moved on to Apollo 7 I would say one more thing that I think is important
about the team and the way we got to the moon. We had about ten or a dozen Gemini flights,
man flights, two people in the cockpit and when I look back on that I think what I realize is
that the people who plan the Gemini program in between the one man Mercury capsule and the Apollo
mission where we had to do so much other kind of work going to the moon. They really was a stroke
of genius because out of that program came not so much space hardware. We used different hardware
for Apollo. What came out of it was the operations team. If you look at the astronauts that flew
the Apollo missions I think to a man, almost to a man, they had all flown in Gemini. We did
launches, rendezvous, we didn't use the ejection seats in one very hairy sequence on the pad.
We did rendezvous every way there was to do it. We did EVAs, we docked with a genus, we rode
around on chairs or at least we tried to the man maneuvering chairs that we use a derivative of on
the shuttle today. When I look back on that and realize all the different things that we did that
were necessary to know how to do when we went to the moon I would say that we came into Apollo with
the flight crews and the ground crews like gang busters. It's the word that occurs to me. We came
into the Apollo program with a set of people who had done almost everything you could do in man
to earth orbital flight and frankly we were cocky. We thought we know how to do this stuff and we
were looking forward in this assault to the moon. The events had a tragic and well-known halt with
the Apollo fire and in the 18 or so months that intervened between that fire and the first man
flight of Apollo 7. A great number of changes were made to the spacecraft and again the program
came out of it much stronger than it otherwise would have been in the race to the moon.
To finish up this scenario then as in extending our abilities to operate in earth orbit we had
to know that the command service module which was kind of the mothership for the Apollo missions worked.
Apollo 7 was flown in October the fall of 1968 with only one more year to go to meet the
president's deadline. It was about a 10 day flight in earth orbit. We did everything we knew how to
do to the command service module with the three astronauts and the ground people to test it.
And out of that flight came eventually the plans for Apollo 8. Actually a little before the
flight we decided we would do Apollo 8 which was the Frank Borman trip around the moon on Christmas.
But when I look back on it I see that all of those events of the unmanned Apollo flights the things
that we did in Gemini and the confidence that we gained in ourselves and our ability to master
problems we had problems out the galore on almost every Gemini flight. Out of that kind of a
background came the teams of people here and at the Cape but I will speak to the teams here the
astronauts and the ground controllers in MCC and we really felt confident in going into Apollo.
Apollo 7 was successful as you know we tested the vehicle very well in earth orbit and then began
the exciting phase of the moon project where we began to test the really big hardware that is the
new rocket and the lunar module and eventually made our assault upon the moon in terms of completing
the lunar landing mission with the team of people that we had built during those early years
and that team of people was just a cracker checkoff. I have always been to this day and overwhelmed
with pride at the opportunity I had to be a part of that team. So with that I'll turn it over to
Joe and the rest of the guys to tell you after we learned how to do things in earth orbit what we did
to go to the moon. Glenn thank you to take us out from earth orbit cliff. Yeah I'd like to start
before I get into Apollo 8 go back to the thing Glenn mentioned about the second unmanned Saturn 5
launch. That flight occurred I believe in April of 68. I may have lost a year or two but anyway
we had a few problems that day. We lost two engines during the second stage in the flight.
We also had Pogo which nobody knew at the time because we didn't have real time data on it but we
had Pogo to the extent that the crew wouldn't have been able to read cockpit gauges and would have
probably required an abort. We had a number of other problems in the spacecraft but we did stagger
into orbit and I say that is pretty an accurate description. We flew all over the sky but we made
it into orbit and finally got settled down a couple orbits later to do the S4B burn to drive the
spacecraft up to come back in and simulate a lunar return and low and behold it didn't light.
So we aborted off of the S4B and burned the SPS engine some tremendous long period of time
and got all we could out of the flight but we didn't meet the objectives of the flight.
So that as a background a meeting occurred over at Marshall in the fall and I knew there was a
meeting and I got a phone call one night early to come out to craft softies. He wanted to see me.
Well my first thought was oh boy we're going to fly another one of those unmanned deals with
the boiler plate on it and you're elected that's what my thought was. So I walked in his office
fully expecting that and he looked at me and says what do you think about taking a Apollo 8 to the
moon and I said well I haven't thought about it but on thinking about it for a little bit it sounded
like a fun thing to try to do. So he said I want you to go get certain group of people together
and we need to go get some answers so we found out into a team and started looking at all the
reasons why you couldn't and all the reasons why you could. This had been going on for some time
in the background it was initiated by George Lowe and others. In any event NASA made that decision
and while Glenn was preparing to fly Apollo 7 we had a small team off in the center and many of
you probably were on that team trying to figure out how to do that because we had to accelerate
a number of things that we had not planned to do that early primarily in the software world some
of the trajectory kinds of things the spacecraft people had a heck of a job trying to go figure out
whether they could stamp this hardware which we hadn't even flown really ready to go to the moon.
Well all that came together and we didn't in fact make the commitment to go. As Glenn said leading
up to that we we had pretty well proved we knew how to get into Earth orbit and operate there but
this was the first time we were going to leave Earth orbit and go to a place three days away
in terms of getting back if something happens. Not only that we were going to do it without
the lunar module so we would wind up with a one engine in lunar orbit to get us back home
which was eventually what we had to do anyway but it was a little bit spooky if you said and think
about that for a while. The preparations were difficult we spent a lot of hard hours working on that
but the day finally came and we launched launch phase was fairly uneventful as I recall and
we did our two orbits of preparation to get ready to go to the moon and burned the S4B successfully
for TLI and from that point on we had a different ballgame or hands for example. In Earth orbit is
most of you or a lot of you know you key everything that you're trying to do on the console wherever
your console is to when is the next station pass because you got to get you got about five minutes
to seven minutes to get information up and down to the spacecraft. Well here we were in a situation
where we could talk to him anytime we want to and that was a strange thing as a matter of fact
I thought about that during the flight because I got to the point where you'd almost forget they
were there because you know you you could talk to him anytime you wanted to but anyway the trip
out was not uneventful and these guys feel free to hop in here because you were involved too.
One of the things that we had decided to do clever devils that we are was that we would test that
engine on the way out to be sure they worked right and I think we're going to do a small out of
plane maneuver just to burp the SPS and be sure it was working right. Well we did that and it didn't
work right and it did not and there was a little funny in the thrust chamber pressure so now we've
got three days to look at data and talk to everybody that you can find in the world to talk to
to satisfy ourselves that we can indeed commit to put the spacecraft in a orbit knowing when we do
that it has to work to come home. Well there are an awful lot of smart people today some of them
are smarter than we were I think but there were some smart people in and they gathered them
whether they be contractors that are devils of a plant somewhere or the guy that designed it
whatever it took and satisfied all levels of management at the Johnson Space Center and headquarters
that yes indeed we understood what was going on with the engine today I couldn't explain it
but that we were satisfied it was okay to use it and commit to the orbit.
The easy guys you know anything they add to that do you some of you were involved in looking at
that problem I would just add this to it Cliff in retrospect that was a major systems problem that
had to be dealt with and dealt with right and the situation we were faced with was there was the
possibility that after the first burn we could have done another little one and then another
little one later to take it out but we had to do those fairly quickly so there was an urgency to
deciding whether we would try another test on the engine or not and it fell to me on my shift to
deal with that problem well at the same time and I don't even know if this is public knowledge but
at the same time there was a report from the crew that one of the crew members of the
community say see how that and I was we didn't have it was contained it is and there were some
tears in people's eyes when that was going on it was a great flight I really enjoyed it
anybody else Cliff Cliff thank you already I'm hearing stories I didn't didn't know about before
I flew in space I'm glad I'm worrying about them now and not Jerry well I kind of pick up
where Cliff left there and and and step quickly and kind of bring maybe me and Steve up to the Apollo 11
time frame when we landed on the moon and it's only I agree with what Cliff said that Apollo 8 mission
was it was kind of scary in a way and the reason that it was kind of scary is that it in the
courage that he mentioned to take that step is that everything we had done up to that point with
the possible exception of the EVA that we did in Germany we had built a very careful building
block approach add one thing at a time and take the next step and Apollo 8 kind of jumped out
of that for a for a good reason it pushed the system I think to go on faster and well within
constraints of safety but it showed a an ability to take risk and I think that's where when it's
measured and when the gain is worth the risk and I think that's where Cliff and I really agree that
those kinds of things are getting harder and harder to do and but let me get to that building
block approach Glenn kind of brought you through what built up to get us to Apollo 7 and for the most
part Apollo itself had that same building block approach after 8 the next thing we did was Apollo 9
which was a low earth orbit back in earth orbit again but we added additional step to it we added
the lunar module in the lunar module in the command module docked together just like it would be
at the moon we're in earth orbit and we undocked them and separated them it's first time we'd
ever done anything like that and had two two people in the limb the lunar module without a heat shield
it was the first time we'd ever had anybody in orbit that didn't have a protective heat shield to
get down and that that was a significant step but we also proved that we could rendezvous
redock transfer the crew back in discard the limb and re-enter the command module now that was
had to be done to return from the moon so that was another step in the process Apollo 10 came right
after that we had already been to the moon on Apollo 8 to go into orbit Apollo 10 was another
let's go into orbit around the moon but it had the lunar module with it which was at another
additional step and we did the same thing in earth or I'm sorry in lunar orbit that something like
we had done in earth orbit on Apollo 9 we separated the crewman Tom Staff and Jean Sernen went down
very low to the surface but didn't land but they were close in fact some of you may remember Jean
Sernen saying we're really down amongst him and that was because he could see the mountains higher
or at least appearing to be higher like most airplane pilots think they're higher than they are and
they finally weren't but they were really got down low and then they didn't abort and came up just
like they would have had to in the event of an emergency but this one was planned it wasn't planned
to touch down so here we built another block they came back up rendezvous with the the command
command module did its maneuver and brought them home so you can see this step by step
creeping up on the the problem and by the time we launched Apollo 11
as Glenn said the control team was ready the launch people at Cape had been through it several times
the astronauts very well prepared but there was a difference about 11
and I think some of us probably they were involved in it day to day and I'd like to get the
reaction of these guys I don't think we felt the importance of it then like we did in later years
this was and I get back to that building block process it was just another it was another step
on a goal we had been pursuing for so long that many of us didn't think of it I don't think
it's being this profound step we saw it as a great achievement that we we wanted to make happen
but we didn't understand maybe what the rest of the world how they felt about it and we started
I can remember and I've thought about this lot in the last week or two because I've had
people ask me about it and reporters wanting to know what it was like I can remember and although
on Apollo 11 I was I was just I did a trans lunar shift a sleep shift virtually on the way out
and one on the way back because I was already assigned Apollo 12 as the lead flight director
and was already starting to think about that flight but I can remember being
although we were on a high step and ready to do it just like we had on 10 I didn't feel a great
difference in the start I didn't have that that a different feeling than I had from 10
and I took it kind of one step we've done this we've been here we keep going
and I can remember very clearly where the difference came you know Steve for him he'll probably
talk about some of the alarms that we got on Apollo probably started there for him
it didn't for me because I knew he had that under control it was a piece of cake but
what I really remember is when Buzz said we're starting to pick up some dust and I can
can remember to this day that I had the realization he's talking about dust being blown off the moon
by the decent engine and that was a step we had not taken yet and from there on that flight had a great
different feeling for me and then surprisingly once we got off the moon and back up
to the to the lunar orbit point I felt well we've done this before and it should be okay
but that interim period was that last step of that building block that we hadn't done yet so
it put that great difference to it the I think the mission control teams reaction to
to the landing is is kind of understandable while there was great euphoria I think probably
individually there was no wild screaming or or anything like that in fact a common-dont crans
was the flight director and as those of you that know Jean Crans and those of you don't I'll tell
you a little bit about him probably one of the toughest disciplinary and kinds of guys in the world
very extremely thorough right on top of the situation Jean Crans was an international asset
and he was just the right guy to be running the control center that day he kept a calmness to it
we had some abort opportunities playing there early I think we called him T1 and T2 and we didn't
know if when the limb touched down it might start to one of the gears might start to sink and we
might have to punch off immediately but we did also have some windows pointed out where we would
do these systems checks quickly and if if there was an opportunity to abort we had to command module
in the right space for them to get back to it so it was a very business-like atmosphere
and kind of a calm sort of thing on a personal note as soon as we touched down and I realized we
had done it and it was all very exciting I had started thinking about Apollo 12 actually before
they even had done their EVA because we had already started talking about what we were going to
try to do on Apollo 12 which was a pretty exacting test and but that built on and the control center
throughout that entire period stay was a very subdued, professional kind of atmosphere I can remember
and while I can't tell you exactly what it said I can remember one humorous note that since I was
kind of working the night shifts I came in one night and one of our flight controllers had put
up on one of the big screens about size this thing over here some comment not too kind about the
Russians and in other than that I didn't see any for volatility in the control center throughout
that whole period great great opportunity in a great day for the country to think about now 20
years later one final thought and what we were talking about this as we were standing up here before
this started today one of the things that just amazes me about that whole period leading up to
the lunar landing and even now to some degree was the youthfulness of that control team
if I'm not mistaken I think at that point man to my left here was
in his mid-30s and he was the oldest flight director I won't I won't pin it down to you
I think he was the oldest flight director he molded and crammed
but we were all a bunch of young people Steve Bales in his 20s and when I think about
marshaling that kind of energy and vigor in the interest that was shown and we still see signs
of that today obviously we did have a team of management on top of us some of them older than that
that were very very supportive and very visionary and very very good but I think back to the
to the young people that that made that happen and and kind of marvel that it could have been done
by people so young we had Glenn and I know have talked about this we probably had more responsibility
at about age 30 than most people will have in lifetime and we had that opportunity because
NASA gave it to us Joe Jerry thank you Steve you're kind of the cleanup hitter and feel
free to correct what any of these old timers have intended to say I had to correct them all the
time when we're fine I guess just continuing I'm actually here representing Jean Cranstein
as on his way to Washington today and I think I'd like to say talk about two things because he
would want to talk to you about two things one was Apollo 9 Jerry mentioned that was a very
difficult mission and Jean was the lead very difficult because it was sandwiched between probably
the greatest mission of the Apollo program Apollo 8 if you didn't work on Apollo 8 I think you
had heartache I certainly didn't and without coming to the audience you have to understand Mr.
Cranstein whatever flight he was working on was the toughest
and on the other side was Apollo 10 where we were going to take the two vehicles and go right
down among them as Jerry said and here's Apollo 9 and it's going to stay in Earth orbit
and it's going to do things that are very very important we've never checked out the rendezvous
systems we've done rendezvous in Earth orbit we've never used the systems however that we're
actually going to use on the on the moon to get the two ships back together and that
was a mission that it took someone very special I believe to keep inspiring the team and keep
them going and be just as excited about Apollo 9 as they would be about Apollo 10 and 11 and I
think it's important that that you all realize that between those two outstanding missions there was
Apollo 9 and it was just as essential as a building block to go on to 11 as the others were
the other thing I would like to do is take you back through Apollo 11 the landing and the activation
and then leave it on the moon and then maybe turn it over to Glenn Lenny who actually got them back
back off the moon back up to the command module we'd done a number of things and Apollo 8
Apollo 8 was very essential to us because we had a lot of unknowns about how we were going to
navigate not just the fact we're going to come so close to the moon but we were really precisely
having to put down a ship later when we were going to fly Apollo 11 within a few
mile within less than a mile of a precise point on the moon we wanted to put it and the moon is not
nice very cool place to navigate it has concentrations all over the fact they call them
mass cons for sure and they affected our orbit and we weren't quite sure what techniques we were
going to use to actually do the final targeting for the landing module and Apollo 11 our Apollo 8
taught us how to do that and we actually were able to use those things on 11 the activation
of 11 went so well because we had practiced it on on 10 and the new thing and the new part of the
game was was the actual descent as Jerry talked about now go back to personal personal moment before
the final descent and the crew was still on the back of the moon the timeline ran we would come
around the side of the moon we'd have 15 minutes to look at the spaceship and then we were going
to fire the engine and we were going to land 10 minutes before acquisition of signal gene
cramps gave a speech the general patent would have liked to have given and I can almost remember
it chapter in verse but the one point that will always stay in my mind as he says I don't care
how we do we've trained we know where where the best there is and whatever happens I'm going to
stand behind you and if you think that doesn't mean a lot to a group of flight controllers and to
point like that you just have never been in that situation it really means everything to you
but then right after that he says I'm gonna lock these doors
now I've never was sure if he meant he was going to keep everybody else out or he's going to keep
everybody else in but he locked the doors uh during the actual descent there were five at least
five times when we could have stopped and and we were very lucky I think we were lucky we were
prepared but in the end we managed to make it through let me just go through the sequence of it
we came around the side of the moon we were expecting nice clear communications and every other
piece of data was garbage we we about had rough communications with a lot of noise we couldn't
hardly hear the crew and we the telemetry was was there one minute and it wasn't there the next
minute and right away gene has to decide we have enough data to keep going on
fortunately that's what we've been trained to do the simulation people had driven us right to
that point many times and gene oldest flight control team and and collectively uh they they tried
to tell him you know what we were seeing what we weren't he had to make he made a judgment that
that we had enough information to do to keep going on we start the descent and right away we find
out we have another problem uh even though we've done the very best we could on on targeting
our able to predict our ability to predict where the landing module was going to be was an air it
was an air about four miles the guys were coming in about four miles down range from where they
thought they were from where we'd hoped we were targeting them we find that out and not only that
we have a velocity air and altitude about two-thirds of the way to where we would have to abort
we're sweating this one out for a couple of minutes and during the descent uh the way we set up
11 the crew actually rolled the vehicle around oh about five eight four five minutes into the
descent landing radar locked on correct the velocity problem there wasn't anything we were going to
do about the down range problem we're through that we're starting to relax relax if you can call
it that and the crew says I've got this computer alarm there is no way you're supposed to be getting
computer alarms during descent there's absolutely no way you're supposed to uh they're put in air
to debug check out and do everything else but they are not put in air to that kind of alarm to
have during descent uh fortunately again our training came to our aid we had been given those kind
of cases a couple of weeks before and and in fact when we were given that case in the simulation
I was ready to write it off and say what are we doing spending our time on this on this kind of
nonsense because it's not realistic and I've got other things to worry about and Jean said you
will not you will not write that off you will form a team you will get with the folks and you will
go through every possible alarm I don't care if they're realistic enough and you will make up a
game plan on how you're going to play it so due to the training and due to Jean's insistence we had
a we had a game plan and it was pretty good now the experts in this case this alarm happened to say
a computer's got too much to do in this last second and experts had been of some help not a great
deal of help on this one they said look this isn't supposed to happen we talked about that for an hour
after we got him through that after they told us for an hour it wasn't ever supposed to happen we
said finally got through to him that yeah but it has happened what it what we should we do they said
well it's a very bad situation but if it doesn't happen too much you're sort of if it doesn't
have too much you're sort of left come up with your own judgment about what you should do next
and our own judgment had been it wasn't happening that often and everything else looked fine
navigation looked fine guidance looked fine no more lines and made a decision to go on now the crew
was distracted by the alarm so much that they were apparently at this time I didn't know this they
were looking inside the cockpit and they were trying to figure out maybe left a switch out of
configuration what had you and by the time that Neil looked up and saw who was going this four-mile
error that I told you about it propagating the fact weren't coming down in this nice smooth place
we were supposed to come down and we'll come down to Boulderfield and he is flying the flying
ship as he'd been trained to do over the Boulderfield all the time the gas is getting lower and lower
and and if you listen to the other ground you hear there's 60 seconds I meant that's what it really
means 60 seconds and you're going to have to leave and then you hear 30 seconds the same thing
and then there's a long pause even then after the 30 seconds we're getting down to the 17 15
second frame and most people don't realize that we're about 15 seconds give or take a couple
from having to stop the descent and then the famous I hear I see the dust crew touches down
and my personal reaction of was one of of intense relief and gratitude and then it was at one
of wonder because the crew said something I'd never heard them say before all during a training
they called themselves the eagle never used any word with eagle and then on the day of January 20th
3 o'clock in the afternoon they used the word tranquility base and that changed the mission entirely
for me because we really had a base on a moon a forward outpost if you will and that was to
me the most dramatic event and the most dramatic saying that was under in that mission and we
started a lot of problems we really didn't know where we were I mean clearly we knew within a
some diameter of where we were on the moon but we landed downstream didn't know where we were
going to have to find out where we took off the next day and we left all those problems with
Glenn Loney who've had about 10 different sources to tell him where we were on the moon out they
can't he agreed and he finally decided and we get going so I'll turn that back to him.
This is right by the interstate Steve.
Yeah I recall once going to one of those changes ship press conferences and I was having a
terrible time trying to explain anybody that could figure out how to go to the moon and land
didn't know where we were but that was a situation for a while. Well once Mr. Cranson's
to Bale's and Company and Mr. Armstrong and Aldrin got the machine on the surface we set out
to do something else that we hadn't done before we had we had played around how to shouldn't
use that word we had done EVAs in Germany but of course that's under weightlessness environment
here we're in 16G so there were a lot of things that we needed to learn about that how well can
you move around how fast can you move and so forth and so on and and let me put in one one story
before I get into the surface activity itself there had been a raging debate go on for months
amongst the doctors and the rest of the world about when we land on the moon what are we going
to do next that is are we going to take a rest cycle with the crew are we going to go ahead and
prepare to get out well the doctors in their judgment felt that certainly we should have them
go to sleep there were a number of us who felt that that was going to be very difficult for anybody
to do having landed on the moon for the first time in the world to immediately go to sleep
without some help so anyway the doctors won the debate and it was baseline that we would in
fact have a sleep period before we did the EVA now they pointed out several of them Mr. Griffin
has pointed out that I'm the elder of this group and I was also clever enough to believe that
they weren't going to do that when they got there so we had prepared for that eventuality also that
if a decision was changed and they decided to go ahead and do the EVA we'd be ready to support
well sure enough not too long after they had landed and got all the switches taken care of
settled down a bit we get this radio message that Houston we think we'd like to go ahead and do
the EVA and I'm smiling you know because I knew that was going to happen and I'm kneeling the doctors
and of course we said yes well the only thing in my mind that I did wrong was I had been up
like everybody else for this whole preparation for decent and lunar decent and I had fixed myself
where I had to pull a whole shift on the moon so it made for a long day but anyhow it took a while
being first time we did it and the limb was very cramped to get all that gear on and checked out
and as I recall it seemed like forever to get the cab and to find the depress to the point where
they could open hatch at the last two tenths of a PSI or something that seemed like it took forever
but Neil got out and I recall my own reaction when he got out and on to the surface of the moon
and looking at it on that TV I said this just doesn't seem real you know and here I am sitting here
in the middle of all this and it just didn't seem real but in fact it was they said about to do
their job and as usual we had overprogrammed the timeline we had put more stuff in there than
three people could probably do that they did the best they could they also had to stop and take a
phone call from somewhere down here in the White House area and we had a carefully laid out plan
that we were going to have I believe there were two types of samples documented samples which took
quite a bit of time and what we call grab samples where you just grab raw
now we only had about two hours and thirty minutes program to to be out on the moon for this first
flight and again we were playing it very conservative we could have stayed longer but we felt let's
do what we have to do that is of significance which was deploy a scientific package and gather
some samples and get back in while we're ahead so I think the guys did a fantastic job of
doing the best job they could in a new environment in a very compressed timeline
and with the distractions which were not of their doing I still think they came out of it with a
really a wealth of information and they did a really did a great job the lunar surface thing
again was entirely new to us it would spend many hours practicing it's difficult to simulate that
but we could in some ways and we even had practice astronauts that would get on the phone with us
and we'd play the what if games on the moon just like we would do in rendezvous or any other
operation again we spent about two hours and thirty five minutes I believe it was I was very very
relieved to see that cabin start to pressurize to get them back in there at that point I felt like
we had done it because I had complete confidence that we could in fact rendezvous with the
mothership and we had done those things before and I was very confident that we had it made at
that point I was always very nervous when they were outside the spacecraft in Earth orbit or on
the moon because when you stop and think that that one seems like flimsy suit that you guys wear
and unluckily as a flight director I seemed to manage to have to terminate most the EVAs in
Germany so I was kind of nervous about that whole operation so I was very glad when I got back in
and pumped that cabin up and you had two very very tired astronauts at that point and a heck of a
lot of tired ones on the ground too and with that point I think we we did in fact manage to get
them to sleep for a while and Glenn Schiff was to get them back to the command service module.
Getting ready for Ascent and Lunar Arbor rendezvous there was one thing about Ascent it was
there there are no other alternatives the Asset Engine the separation sequence from the
D-Send stage which represented sort of a platform from which to launch the Ascent stage was just one
way there was just one way to do it and it had to work for that reason the Ascent Engine got a lot
of attention like a lot of other things did but a lot of attention and there was a great deal of
worry about it etc etc in terms of getting off the moon for me and probably for the control center
for the flight controllers in the MCC example during the launch phase there's a possibility of all
kinds of abort decisions or other kind of decisions have to be made and it kind of loads you up
with a set of possibilities a set of options a set of dealing with them countdowns are like that too
but for us at least and especially for me on the lunar surface we didn't have any choices to make
we just had to get the thing all set upright be sure all the navigation was right and then go for it
there were any decisions to make the thing had to work and that's what happened the Asset Engine
work fine and when we finished with it we were in lunar orbit at that time I felt we were on
the downhill side of the mission because this team of people here and the astronauts we had done
EVA every way from Sunday at night EVA rendezvous every way from Sunday during a Gemini program we did
them upside down backwards left hand or right handed and we really we really felt like we knew
how to do that and besides that we had Buzz Aldrin on board who had invented the major part of
the techniques that we used so we were very confident about our ability to do the lunar orbit rendezvous
Apollo tan of course had added to that in the lunar environment so getting through the SN phase was
was just no choice no decisions to make just hang on to the console for six minutes and pray
and we did that the lunar orbit round of the went well and then the guys started transferring back in the CSM
for the eventual return back to this planet that we live on called Earth.
Thank you we've we've gotten ourselves back into lunar orbit you want to continue the mission
you want to start skipping around to other missions Jerry well I think it's probably time to
skip around a little bit understandably we have focused on Apollo 11 because that's what we
celebrate at this time but I think what we did after 11 in a very summary wake and just it was
nothing short of fantastic we went back you know one flight we aborted and let me tell you about
in keeping with what Steve said about Jean Crant it was the mission that he was the lead on it was
always the toughest the really tough mission was Apollo 12 that's because I was the lead flight
director on Apollo 12 and it wasn't an interesting flight we and it's kind of an example of every one
of these flights had a very every one of them we could sit and talk particularly this crowd up here
and some of you could talk about every one of these flights in great detail because they all had
their own personality Apollo 12 it was one you may remember we got hit by lightning about 50 seconds
after after launch with an Aggie flight director yeah Cliff says with an Aggie flight director
and we handled that we thought we were I thought we were going to have to abort it's thank god the
the Saturn 5 kept working and got us into to Earth orbit there's a very interesting mission in that
we went and landed did a pinpoint landing next to the surveyor spacecraft which had been sent
up their unmanned seven years earlier in the crew of Conrad and Bean actually got out and got some
pieces off of that spacecraft and and picking up on what Steve said with our uncertainties about
the moon's home of genuity the idea that it's not a good
sphere until you know all of the where the mass cons are and we weren't sure we could do it now
I was the lead flight director for that flight and Cliff Charlesworth did the landing phase
and he's never forgiven me we had a custom in those days when you were lead flight director the
first time you got the NASA exceptional service metal and I got my metal in the salutation
logs me for performing the pinpoint landing that Clifford was the flight director for and he's
never forgiven me for it one of these days I'm going to give you that metal just so you can have
but anyhow 13 turned out to be a real excitement because of the problem that we had with the oxygen
blowing up on the weight of the moon we had to abort 14 15 16 all had their their problems and
their successes and I think celebrating Apollo 11 like we are at this time is a great time to
reflect on every one of those missions because it's the only time that we can talk about the whole
program and kind of celebrate together because we don't celebrate those other flights the way we
did it will this one but I think I just wanted to get that plug in there for those other missions
that came after thank you Jerry thank you Jerry I'm going to jump in here for just a moment
and say you've heard a lot from Cliff and from the others about the moral strength and courage
that was required on the part of the flight directors and their team of literally hundreds of
individuals many of whom most of whom were very young to make the decisions necessary to go to
the moon and successfully carry it out and I'll share a story with you that actually comes it's a
personal story but it comes from that time my son was two and three years old in those years
and one day he he was discovered in the kitchen with a large box of dirt and pebbles from our back yard
which he had dumped on his mother's kitchen and I inquired of three-year-old son what he was doing
dumping these this dirt in his mother's kitchen and he informed me that it was not dirt it was
earth rocks he had been collecting earth rocks and I stopped it he it was a it was a good ploy because
it really stopped me for a moment I'd never heard the term earth rocks before but it made sense and
the he as far as I know had invented that as had every other young person his age had invented
during those years well because of his years I also from time to time would read bedtime stories and
one of his favorite was entitled James and the Giant Peach and there may be one or two of you in
audience who's not uh immediately familiar with that book and it starts out its first sentence
is at the age of six James was at the London Zoo with his parents when a crazed rhinoceros escaped
and ate his parents you may feel sorry for his parents don't their problems were over in 15 seconds
but James had to go live with his and so on the story begins there's a underlying meaning in that I
think and and this feeling is is shared by all astronauts that when if if and when something goes
along along in a space mission knock on wood that it doesn't the astronauts problems could be over in
a few seconds but the responsibility lies with the flight directors and their team and that's very
well recognized by all of us in the business and the stories that we all including myself are
listening to today I kind are based on that thought that that philosophy that realization
that does not mean that all the stories are true but Steve you'd mentioned to me earlier that
there is is a handbook that all flight directors and their their team uses called mission rules
and one could naively think that there's nothing to this business of being a flight director you
just look up and owners manual the mission rule book what to do in this case or that case and
when you learn though that the mission rule book is how many rules do we operate did we operate
with in Apollo would you get is about that thick and Steve said he had a very a rule he was very
fond of known as one day six and maybe you could explain something about the way the rules work
in the mission control guys are all forgotten see they never read their mission rules I was on the
one had to read them these are these guys were flight directors but they do know this rule and it says
I can paraphrase that I gave it to to a job but that paraphrase it says the flight director at his
discretion may take any action needed to accomplish to conduct the successful completion of a mission
which means that if the flight director so decides he changes those rules to make the thing work
out right and that's responsible to these three gentlemen of head and and over the years and of
conductive I said I have a number of questions asked before I start I wonder if maybe we could
start to have one or two from the audience yes right there in the middle and speak as loudly as
we can we won't use we won't use microphones by the way once we start to tell stories believe me we
can continue till this time tomorrow and maybe we will you're welcome to stay till about one one
thirty maybe a little before two and we'll more or less officially break up those of you who have
other things to do right now we won't be at all offended if you go on and do those other things
however there will not be a movie starting in here in 15 minutes we're going to stay here for
a little while longer question right in the middle the question was we had some problems with
docking in Apollo was it Apollo 11 I believe that was 14 I think we did a little bump on 11
to do it 14 we had a problem well I think one one of them was what's came before
the the module was picked up for the first time and the whole mission was in jeopardy because it
wasn't that was Apollo 14 we had a problem when they separated and came back in to get the
lamb out of the s4b adapter they couldn't dock but but the Glenn thinks he's right that we did
have a bridge on 11 I don't remember oh no that you're thinking of Apollo 10 in Apollo 10 we had
this sequence of lunar orbit rendezvous between what the spacecraft were called Charlie Brown
Snoopy as a matter of fact with Tom Stafford and Jean Sernin in the lunar module and there was a
violent maneuver it wasn't exactly around the time of docking it was a misplaced switch and when
they went into a configuration that tested the switch it was in the wrong place and the spacecraft
did something funny leading to some of Jean Sernin's most famous profanity you know one thing
that that is important here though and and I saw this on a TV show the other night that did
purport some kind of wild maneuver on 11 and I didn't when I saw it I couldn't remember that
so I don't know if that's where you may have picked that up but but I don't think it happened
not on that flight right here
the the question was what decisions were required what discussions held with in the case of Apollo 12
meaning after it had been hit by lightning and so on let me quickly set the stage for you we
launched in about in about 50 seconds after launch we didn't know at the time we'd been hit by
lightning although while we were still under powered flight Pete Conrad said I think we may have
been hit by lightning in later photos and analysis shows we probably were a big zorch I mean a big
one what it did is that it we provided power to the spacecraft by fuel cells that provided the
power and those were connected to the distribution system through a series of circuits that in
fact I think even had some relays in it mechanical relays and when it when it when the lightning hit
it knocked all of those fuel cell power off off of the main distribution system inside the
spacecraft so the spacecraft immediately all the lights dimmed all the warning lights came on
in the only thing that was providing any power at all were the entry batteries which were storage
batteries that we had we also put on for launch had those batteries not been on I mean they would
gone dark but they did they were able to have enough power to communicate and to see their
caution warning thank God as I said earlier the the Saturn was steered by a thing called the
instrumentation unit which was a separate guidance system down in the Saturn and it was not
affected so that as soon as it happened I know the first thing I looked at were the engines to see if
they were still burning they were in the trajectory that these guys were watching was going in the
right bracket we were still climbing uphill but I my immediate thought was we may have to abort but
if we do let's don't get panicking about it let's do it as high up as as we can to make sure
everything has enough time to work young e-commerce by the name of John Aaron who now is runs the
space station project here at JSC had seen a case similar going back to some of the simulation
work that had been done it wasn't exactly the same but he had seen a case in a simulation that
he wondered about and he wondered if this might be the case that he had seen the worst thing that
happened to us on the ground as we lost all our data it was it absolutely went to garbage so we
had no telemetry so we couldn't help them until we got something back so that we could see what
was going on John made a switch call I'll never forget it S.C.E. to ox those of you that are
electronics those signal conditioning equipment to auxiliary and that set up a different
signal conditioning equipment for the for this radio data that would come back to us he asked
we asked the crew to go to that auxiliary position they did this was probably 40 to 45 seconds after
we've been hit by lightning they went to the auxiliary position and voila the data was restored
we could see all of the telemetry data at that point the crew was still and would tell you they
were they had no idea what to do because they had no data either so but I'm doing that then
John Aaron could see that the fuel cells were not providing any power to this distribution system
so the first thing he said was have them reset the fuel cells which was just a momentary switch
on each of three cells and as soon as he did the spacecraft lights came back up a lot of the
caution and warning which was primarily power oriented those lights went out and about the only
thing we had as a problem at that point was the guidance system which these guys depended on
in the in the command module had lost its reference and it was tumbling and so forth
we went on into orbit and as I recall what we take two revs before we went TLI I think we
two revs before we go transliner we actually extended a rev and to give us a little more time
to to look at the systems to see if we could if we were in good enough shape to go on we got the
platform realigned so that we had a good guidance system we did some checks checking it to drift
characteristic and it looked okay and then I think and John Aaron was the guy that really
that really made this happen he said you know if we would go through a check very similar to what
we would have to do for trans earth injection that is to say if we could verify essentially the
checklist to do the burn that would get us out of lunar orbit and headed back home we ought to be
ready to go we don't know what's happened to the limb but at least we could verify that the
CSM is okay and then we could get into orbit and out of orbit at the moon so that's what we did
we took it we took an extra rev to do it in earth orbit and we went through a checklist if we
powered up gimbal motors and all that kind of stuff to make sure that the SPS the service
propulsion system in the back of the command service module is right we did every electronic
check we checked all the alternates circuits on calm and all that all worked fine and at that point
we kind of let each other and said let's do it let's go on to the moon I never will forget
Chris Kraft one statement to you when he walked we were in the middle all of this and some of you
have seen it real and some of you have seen it on television and others that people have headsets
on that kind of haggard and they're walking around they're looking around and in the middle all
this craft came down and he put his hand on my shoulder and he said young man we don't have to go
to the moon today that's all he said and I said yes sir and but we had the world turned on the
program offices and all that that's the way the thing did the plant the contractors back at the
plant all got involved in this thing and it finally I guess the final decision was we could
see no reason not to go and and let me add the final footnote after that problem it's very
much like the Apollo 14 docking problem which I was also involved in after that problem it's probably
the smoothest mission we've ever had we had virtually no other problems they seem like every
mission had at least one place where you'd say good gosh you know how can we ever have had that
happen but after that Apollo 12 went ticky but you're really good Jerry I'd like to add something
to that I sat in the control center watching Jerry and his team go through this and
one of the things that occurs to me now and perhaps did then I might not have thought of it this
way was that this country has always been very blessed it seems to spit out the right man at the
right time or the right woman at the right time to meet some kind of a challenge and we've
been very blessed in their regard in the 200 some years this country's been around Apollo 12
there in my opinion there is not one other individual in the entire world who could have made
the call at the Ecom console other than the man who was there John Aaron he's the only man I did
I knew I was able to put that together in the in the time he did and make exactly the correct call
haven't prepared himself to do so it was not luck I would say the same of Jerry and his whole team
they were very common very professional we replayed that lightning strike and it scared to live in
Jesus as soon as we saw this thing coming out the tail of the rocket and the flight crew they
they settled down and got things back underway and Jerry alluded to it here on the earth orbit stuff
but it was a funny feeling in the control center and we talk in terms of platforms and computers
and fuel cells and control systems and a lot of complicated stuff but when they got done with
this checklist and this and the spacecraft and the rocket looked to be okay it would just kind
of looked around at each other and you know the decision was made on the basis of well what are we
going to do now this thing works so as long as we're up here let's get on with it and it was kind
of a it was almost typical of the decisions it was characteristic of the decisions that were made
in the Apollo program and that is yeah there are risks with anything we do let's get on with it
and that's the kind of decision Jerry's team made in that it was a pleasure to watch
him I think they have come in oh well okay you're going to talk to me about that little no no
when shortly after they were on the lunar surface we lost the TV camera now I thought about that a
lot afterwards and I said of all of the astronauts that I know that couldn't have happened to the
more perfect crew because we had Pete Conrad on the surface of the moon with no TV but yet he with
his running commentary and his whistling and humming and so forth it was almost as good as having the TV
yeah another thought to just get him out of that 12 was interesting I some of you know
this said earlier I went to him and Albein went to University of Texas and we had a pretty good
running battle going on good naturedly two things happened on that flight that that were both
kind of gothious from one eggie to it to an old T-sipper one is is that one morning I woke him up by
playing to eggie wore him to him which neither one of them have ever forgiven me for but the other
thing who has his back of this TV thing Albein was the guy remember that it got pointed at the sun
and he was he had to watch at that time and he burned it out so I never let him hear at the end of
that one either anyway one of the footnote to that thing about John Aaron and picks up on something
I said earlier here was this guy making this critical call and I agree with Glenn I think Cliff and
Steve would probably Joe too that he was the right guy to be there and the right guy to do it
may have been the only one I don't know but if I recall correctly I think he was 25 years old
and graduate of northeast Oklahoma armoy interesting twist I've got to continue on Apollo 12 but it's
it's a just a footnote to to these stories that occurred two missions later the command module
pilot on 12 was Dick Gordon he did not go down to the moon service but I would guess he had the
brunt of the checklist to come home and he was one one busy astronaut during that time and he
probably was put on the on the banquet circuit after that mission for Apollo 13 I'm not sure where
Dick was but out of just coincidence he and I were together to see the launch of Apollo 14
at in a very remote viewing area in Florida only a handful of people around Dick was one of them I
was there and because of the lessons learned from 12 of course the mission rule and everything
else was changed with regard to when do we launch Saturn V's with regard to clouds overhead
I can't cite it the way Steve could but we were a bit more conservative Apollo 14 came counted
down everything was beautiful it was a gorgeous day almost not a cloud inside and right as it came
to the crucial minutes a little puffy white cloud like out of a Casper the Ghost movie came
floated right over the launch escape tower of that rocket and the launch was held and I don't
I don't not know how long it was held I would guess 10 minutes or so but every minute Dick Gordon
would look out shout to the wind shake these fists and shout chicken crew chicken crew
now is that what he said or words to that effect
Jerry you mentioned there was probably not a mission that went by Apollo mission that didn't
have one major event we finished 12 would someone want to start with 13 or shall we come back to
that later it definitely had a major event well Apollo 13 was the flight that we had a problem about
two thirds of the way the moon went a tank blew up and we in effect lost the mothership the command
service module and had to move into the lunar module and bring it back it really wasn't sparring
it was inspiring to see how how calmly and how professionally and how accurately and how well
people did with what was an extreme ultimate test survival of a crew in the spacecraft and people
here came through at gangbusters team I talked about earlier at 10 years of experience it came
through this team was right there questions about 13 or anything else for that matter yes
the the question is about the oxygen supply aboard the command module and
the service module lunar module on Apollo 13 and how was that supply stretched those of you who are
not that familiar with the mission may not know that the oxygen tanks that fed the command module
actually exploded so a good good portion of the oxygen was consumed in the explosion
but we had a small tank of oxygen in the command module outside of the cryogenic tanks a small
tank that was called a surge tank used mostly for entry when the cryogenic tanks were going away
but in addition to that we had a lot of oxygen available for breathing in the lunar module
so the lunar module oxygen was really the source that kept the crew alive during the during the
80s some hours that it took to return the limiting parameter that we were dealing with really was
the water that we had on board the lunar module which was used for cooling because it was built
for a certain amount of stay time on the moon with a certain power configuration and we extended
it a great deal in order to to bring off all of the maneuvers in the power power up that we had
to have in the lunar module to carry this crew and command service module back there so the limiting
parameter was the cooling we were struggling to keep the electrical loads low and therefore the
requirement for cooling water low and it was the thing that always text us in terms of what
option should we exercise options to burn the engine usually took a lot of power for the guidance
to control system and the propulsion systems etc so we were like meisers when it came to to
metering out the checklist in terms of what we're going to do because of our concern for using
up the limb water it was the critical parameter for the limb the the next big critical parameter was
this poor old command module was frozen cold we never turned it off like that before and
Jean's team had to get offline and figure out how to activate and bring the command module back in
and the rest of us who stayed working the shifts in the flight knew that Jean's team I think
Steve worked on that team to figure out how to get the command module activated so we had plenty
to worry about but oxygen wasn't the toughest one that we had it was less limiting than some of the
other things back back while we had the lunar module still connected we had all oxygen we could
ever want it's only after we had to shut it off and we get rid of it that you had to use this
stored oxygen in the cabin in a little bit out of that entry tank in fact to pick it and we mean
I want to carry this one much further but we use the limb in what we call a lifeboat mode
and it was a real systems exercise and if there was ever a flight you know a lot of times we had
guidance and trajectory and I mean like the landing on the first landing on the moon and all that
that was the key Apollo 13 was probably the ultimate systems exercise that we may have any
flight that we've ever done before our sense because we literally as Jean as Glenn said when they
bailed out of the command module went over into the limb to live they just powered it down by
turning everything off and I mean coal soaked they said there was actually kind of a when they went
back in there kind of almost it felt like a cellar it was moist and it was cold and even some
spots of ice into the thing just literally kind of froze up and they were over in the lunar module
with the hatch closed just living off the lunar module at an entire time they even powered the
crew powered themselves down too they didn't do much because they were trying to preserve metabolic
uses of oxygen water everything else so it was a real that's a real thrill but you know
didn't you feel I I felt pretty comfortable that we had that thing in tow by the time they got
out of the command module and and got over into the limb and we saw and then we got the first
chance in Glenn and I were working on these teams that were continuing to work while Jean was
off trying to figure out how to bring that thing back up once we kind of got everything understood
I felt pretty comfortable that we were going to be all right as long as we kept the guidance system
up in the limb which was a big test that we did later on right before we went behind the moon and
but it sure got our attention I have always remarked at the number of acronyms that are used in
the space business and I remember one that came out of conversations on the loop Dr. Lenny and
I'm don't I'm sure it did not go up to the spaceship but it had to do with something that Steve
may have been some of your responsibility to get back to the earth the lunar module was burned
is am I correct in that yeah and the lunar module was really not intended to burn to bring a
ship back to earth but it was going to be used at this time while still connected to the command
module and the guidance had to be very critical in the way the burn was done and I am I correct in
thinking that the stage that would burn would not gimbal maybe it's neither here nor there but in
any case it was going to be a critical burn and so critical that the position of the astronauts even
in the ship or was being considered and those of you who knew Jack swagger a wonderful wonderful
fellow who had wound up on the mission given 24 hours noticed that he was going on that mission by
the way because he replaced Ken Mattingly pulled off by the flight surgeons because he had been
exposed to the measles measles that he of course never did come down with but that's beside the
point Jack was aboard and Jack was a very sturdy astronaut I would guess he was he had been a
football player and he worked out frequently and he he was a very strong and well built a fellow
and like many football players from time to time could could consume vast quantities of food I
might say and the acronym call that I remember on the loop sometime before the burn
went something like Capcom make sure that swagger gets his F.A. over the C.G. of the spaceship before
the burn
it's clear and I remember I remember the date not big always because of the 13 April the 13
but after the explosion and the ship was without any question on the way to the moon hopefully to
return but the jury was still out Jack once again who had been put on his backup pilot on the 12th
of April made a call down to the the the moker to somebody please go over to his apartment get
some records from his apartment and mail in an extension to the internal revenue service because
he had not filed his income taxes he was a loyal patriot what other interesting story about
right right people being in the right place at the right time and it happened more than once
a follow 13 and I believe these guys would agree with me all the lunar modul pilots were super
people but Fred Hayes probably who is a little modul pilot on 13 we all recognize probably the
strongest systems guy in the astronaut court at that time knew more about the how that lunar
module was wired together and all of that in the command module probably more than he should have
because he ended up bugging us to death but anyway when when when the accident happened and this
was very interesting when he got back down the ground of course the ground as we all muster to
and we had plots of oxygen and come to find out and in Fred showed him to me after he got back he had
he had his own system analysis going and when you laid what he analyzed in terms of remaining
quantities time all that alongside what we had done on the ground with with with all the help we had
they almost laid over one for one so here was a guy that had had we lost calm I suspect
Fred would have had the systems under control and probably would have figured out even how to get
this command module powered back at the ones at the right guy at the right time another case right
stuff question at the very back yes
that was that was an interesting set of calls because at the time we went to the Apollo
Apollo 13 in the moon it was the first time we went on what is called or what we termed it a
non free return all the previous flights had been designed so the trajectory had very very tiny
mid courses and if you didn't make them the design of the trajectory was such that the vehicle would
swing around the moon and come back to the vicinity of the earth this time in order to accomplish
the mission we deliberately went away from that strategy I think it was to save propellant or something
so we were on the trajectory at the time of the tank blowing up such a way that we weren't coming
back to the to the earth at all we'd have skipped by the moon and gone some other place not perhaps
as nice as the earth and we had a set of decisions to make and they were coupled in with this question
of how much water we had because we didn't want to keep this lamp powered up any more than we
absolutely had to so we had to go through a set of choices about what kind of maneuvers could get
us back to the earth I believe there was an option that could have fired immediately and gotten
us back but I think it probably bordered on using the command service module engine to do that which
we couldn't power up anymore and wasn't available to us otherwise we could have done that
Jerry and I spent time going over the options that we had both while he was a shot gunning on my shift
and then as I handed over to him and we had a number of them but most importantly in the few hours
that we had after the accident we were motivated to take the references the guidance reference that
we had on the command module transfer it to the limb use the water that it took to keep those
systems powered and to get a burn out of the lunar module engine so we were at least back on the
track where we would return to earth and we accomplished that later on by swinging around the moon a
small burn on the way to the moon that put us back on one of these free return to check to
earth and then at the moon we had a I guess you'd call it a kickburn that we did that we did to
accelerate the spacecraft back to the earth even faster than the free return would have allowed
and the whole thing was a balance of how close to run on the propellant margins how close to run on
the water margins but one of the considerations we had in hours immediately after the accident
or the event was to try to at least get the situation stabilized and part and getting back on a
free return trajectory with a relatively small lunar engine burn was the way to do that and it was
important not only technically I think it was important psychologically for the people on the
ground and I think also for the crew members because they knew they were in dire straits and at least
we established a threshold of we could fumble around quite a bit but maybe if we could pull off
mid courses later we could still get the vehicle back to earth and that was accomplished sometime
during the shift after the accident while I was on and kind of helped with the psychological
environment that we were dealing with with both those of us in the control center and the
and the three fellows upstairs. Yes.
Good question.
Excellent question. In fact every every inch of that computer was encoded. I know none of these
fancy languages or anything else. I clearly depend on what kind of system we use. I'm sure that
however we go back to the minute we will do it much more robustly we'll have six or seven systems
instead of one and we will manage however we go to fill up whatever computer we choose to go.
The question those of you at the back was would we dare land on the moon today with a computer
with a capacity of only 16k which is what the lunar module computer had.
Hey the other thing about answering that question Steve is still in the operations business Cliff
and Jerry and I have moved on the program management and other kinds of management where we are
concerned about how much money gets spent against what kind of requirements. I'm quite sure
that we could have a computer with a million k and it would be full up and we just couldn't
barely stuff all the stuff in it that we had to have and we managers would be struggling with
we ops people not to overload it anymore. They just fill up. Yes.
This is a question about the computer alarms that came up during the descent of Apollo 11 and
how did the interplay go between crew and the flight controllers and the flight directors.
Steve that's probably for you.
That's a 12-1 means that during the last computation cycle the computer did not get through all its
tasks. Now fortunately the guys that had programmed it from MIT had put the least important tasks at the
end such as kudos blood and they put the navigation and the guidance up front. The crew in the
landing module had very limited insight to the computer. They only had three small readouts of
five numbers each. So there all those and had some guidance needles. They had two. They had
some information but we had perfect parameter they had. We had on the ground maybe 10, 12 parameters.
So we're looking at a hundred and they were looking at maybe 15 and we had decided before to
mission that if we did get into some other thing that had happened as a crew had not had to benefit
of this day and a half long knockdown dragout about what we're going to do about each one of them.
The decisions on the base. I don't think it's helped. Careful.
I don't really.
We would talk about it was the fuel cells were flooding and what are we going to do now. The
thrusters were failing and how many do we have left and how are we going to continue with this.
I remember Cliff and I used to have a running argument once we started the VAs flight after flight
with the program manager Chuck Matthews because the little let me call it air conditioner in the
suit that keeps the moisture out of the air. It was just wasn't it was like a half horsepower
and it was getting a one horsepower worth of load of moisture and it just couldn't keep up. The
vizers were always fogging up every time we went out and guys couldn't hang on the base.
And we would go and argue with the program manager and he kept telling us how this half
horsepower air conditioner was designed exactly right and we would always agree. Yeah.
It's exactly right for a half horsepower air conditioner but we need a one horsepower air conditioner
and we never did get one so we had a lot of foggy vizers and spooky things actually associated with the
EVA. So in a manner of speaking the Gemini flights with a variety of systems failures really kind
of tested the metal of the crews and Neil himself had to deal with an emergency landing at one point
because of a control system problem on Gemini 8 but that was a real testing ground for the
team of people and it was almost the flights were almost like the simulations.
We had an expression which they later outlawed craft you used this a lot about real-time flight
planning which gave one impression that we didn't have a flight plan when we started we made it
up as we went and certain people took offense at that but we did do a lot of that and I can recall
being over there at two o'clock one morning with Dr. Loney we were doing a bootleg rendezvous
on one of the Gemini flights this was an idea Glenn had dreamed up about
doing a type of rendezvous that would decrease the closing rates because the
the rendezvous scheme we had you had pretty high closing rates at the end and we tried to
unsuccessfully to get that through the system so when we couldn't we went around the system
and we finally got somebody that would say yes if it doesn't interfere with any of the scientific
work that's going on on the experiments so we said no problem so we did that about two o'clock
in the morning and that's how I met Bob Pyle who was then the experiment program office manager I
looked around and he was sitting up in the viewing room intently watching us I think to be sure
that we didn't not do some of his experiment work but we did we did it all and we did the run.
I remember one of the conversations with the guys from Washington we used to have what they call
the mission director and he had a certain realization that we were a little bit the strong minded
on our own down there on the next level of the control center and bless his heart after we'd been
doing things like this for six or eight Gemini flights he came down and said to us look guys he says
I know you're going to do anything you bloody well please anyway but will you please kind of let
me know ahead of time so I can stay straight with my boss just to put it up to history on the
rendezvous Glenn did on Gemini 10 that's the base although we did not use that on Apollo it is
the rendezvous technique we've used every time we rendezvous to shuttle with something because it is
superb for docking big rendezvous and big heavy vehicles together and undoubtedly will be the one
we rendezvous with space station line and I one other foot the Gemini in my recollection and I
was not a flight director then I was a flight controller in fact I was a GNC and so though we had
I'd say we did have the Gemini 8 problem which was very very serious and could have been a disaster
but it was a whole series of little things every flight seemed to have unlike Apollo where you had
these nagging thing every now and then but it was just a series of nagging things and but I think
that's what Gemini was all about was to shake out some of those kinds of we learned a lot about
thrusters that is constantly were clogged and didn't work right but it sure it was good hardware
and in McDonald's I was did a great job with that system yes question from the middle
the questions about later flights and incidents that the questioner is remembering a board switches
and and things like that like I'll give you my answer and I'll let you guys tell you the truth
but I got out after Apollo 15 and I was sentenced over to building one in the program office at that
time because I was having too much fun I guess but after after Apollo 15 which was the last flight I
was on all the flights were easy they were that's good it's a better fact I left after Apollo 12 and
make the same comment they were all easy guys out there really were
you know 15 16 17 were that last block of spacecraft that were different slightly different in the
whole shift of emphasis I'd say on 15 16 17 while we had science emphasis on on the earlier flights
you could see a trend getting a starry we'd done it enough times that the transportation the
getting to and getting back was playing less a a a tension getter and it took less of our time we
just didn't have to spend quite as much time on worrying how to get there and back because we
had had done that enough that we then started putting a lot more time on the science you've
remember we brought in the rover on those later vehicles we had a thing called the SEMBA which
was the scientific bay on the side of the service module which was did some great lunar mapping
and in things like that we did an EVA on the way back home trans earth to get that
data out of that SEMBA so that it took a slightly different flavor 50 my recollection of 15 16
and 17 were no and I may since I say that somebody's going to remember one I don't remember the
big show stuff with kinds of problems we we as a sail 14 we almost didn't get docked but 15 was
pretty good we had some crew problems there with some what we later determined I learned more
about heart cardiovascular systems during that period and I ever thought I'd know and it was
because of low potassium levels and it makes the heart do some funny things we had some problems
with that on on 15 is scared us because we didn't know quite how it was once we understood it
we kind of over did it on Apollo 16 we loaded them up with potassium to the point they were
uncomfortable and that's all I'll say about that maybe by 17 we might got it about right we had a
lot of I can remember I think it was Apollo 17 where we lost the fender on the rover and nobody
would have ever thought that that would have been a big a big problem but it on the rover on the
lunar surface in this fine dust without a fender on there it was thrown this dirt straight up in
here and covering everything and we finally had them fashioned a fake or a little fender out using
some checklist they actually pull some checklist and got off and they used some clips to fashion
a little fender to keep so there's little stuff like that I don't remember and we got those
great shots remember when Fendel worked he spent a career on figuring out how to get that shot
when we had the TV left on the moon of the Ascent module coming off and timing because of the
four-second delay he had to send commands early and zoom back and tilt and and we were really
getting down to kind of fine tuning as I remember in those last three flights and like I say it
was easier with these guys yeah not bugging us hey by the way at that time of the program we had
the services of one Joe Allen is the Capcom in the control center for quite a while and there were
a lot of reasons that people speculated why that was so Joe came to us with a PhD and something or
another uh and was generally thought of as a brilliant young man although I can never understand
exactly what it was about that but Joe carried that off very well and he used their range for us to
go on geology trips and try to learn things like that but now I learned something here this afternoon I
think he just learned some words from his two-year-old son and faked it but Jerry mentioned his rover
and Joe was the Capcom in the control center and I was still there on Apollo 15 and the guys had this
rover and astronauts are kind of a fighter pilot lot and they liked this little machine and I
used to watch it on TV and it went too fast you know and they would drive it fast down the hill and
the one flight I flew with the rover on the surface and those guys up there running at bloody thing
all over the place I kept asking Joe Joe please get them to slow down please not so sharp at turn
and he would give me an earth rock expression and go right on with whatever he used to
wait it's like they know what they're doing yeah actually easy for us to say with with the lower
gravity it's a lot easier to roll you could not use it yes and so I was more worried than I led
on to director Loney at the time uh Jerry expressed it pretty well by then we were our major problems were
bent fenders uh about uh by the time we flew Apollo 17 we learned how to do it and it's